In this video we'll see some of the stream formatting options that are available that work with any
type of data.
These are very powerful and easy to use.
They give you the ability to define a field with and then display the next data item either left justified
or right justified within that field.
We can also specify the Phil character that will be used to fill up any unused space by default.
There is no field with defined in all output occurs right after the previous output as we've seen already
in this course.
If you do set a field with then the next data item displayed will default to right justified within
that field with it's important to understand that if you set the field with and justification they're
only applied to the next data item placed on the output stream.
When we set the Phil character that will persist until you change it.
Again this all might sound really complicated but it's pretty easy.
And a few examples will show you exactly how it works.
But first let's get the defaults.
Here's an example that uses absolutely no stream manipulators or methods.
This is the default behavior when you put data on a stream.
As you can see we're displaying the floating point number one two three four point five six seven eight.
And then the string hello.
The number will display with six digits of precision and it all round and then hello is displayed immediately
following the number.
If we modify this program slightly so that it prints the number and the string each on a new line then
we get the number displayed as before on the left side with no padding up front followed by the string
on the next line.
So far this is what we've seen.
And it should be pretty clear.
So now let's set the field with the next data item placed on the stream using set W.
In this case we're using set W with a tennis parameter.
This will create a field with of ten for the next data item only.
In this case that data item is numb.
Notice that none will be displayed right justified by default in a field with of 10 I'm displaying a
ruler of numbers just above the actual display.
So you can see the alignment this ruler is displayed by the code is only there so you can better follow
the examples.
Notice that the last digit in number seven in this case is displayed in position 10.
That's the rightmost side of the field with.
We said earlier but now look what happens when we display halo.
It just plays right next to the number starting in column 11.
That's because the field with the justification only apply to the next data item placed on the stream.
In this case that data item was numb.
So Halo has no field with associated with it and it uses just the defaults in this example we set the
field with of each of the three data items to 10.
And remember when we have a field with the default justification is right.
So in this case no is displayed right justified in a width of 10.
The first Halo is displayed right justified.
Also in a field of ten in the last Helo's also displayed right justified and with of 10.
And you can see from the display in the ruler exactly what's happening
this example shows how the field with only applies to the next data item put on the stream.
In this case we set up a field with of 10 and we want left justification for the next data item which
is numb and we get what we expect is displayed in a field with of 10 and it's left justified.
Now we want to display halo.
Notice that halo has no field with associated with it.
So it will display starting in column 11.
In this example we'll set the field widths for all three items displayed.
None we'll have a field with of 10 and it will be right justified by default the first Halo will have
a field with of 10 and we're explicitly setit right justification.
We don't have to do this since it's the default.
But we can do it to be very explicit.
And the second Telo have a field with a 15 and it will also be right justified.
You can see the output is exactly as we expect.
Numb is right justified in a field with of 10.
The first Halo is right justified in a field with of 10.
And the final Halo is right justified in the field with a 15.
Now let's take a look at the set Phil for formatter.
This only works when a data item has a field with associated with it.
We supply the character that we want to fill any empty space in the given field with here's a simple
example we're setting the fill character dash with the set filled manipulator and we're setting the
field with to 10.
This will apply only to numb which is the next data item on the stream.
So we expect not to be right justified in a field with of 10 and the remaining space in that field to
be filled in with dashes that's exactly what we see.
But what about the halo that we display next.
We said that set Phil was persistent but we don't see any dashes with that halo.
That's because that Halo doesn't have a field with associated with it.
So says Phil only applies when we've set the field with so let's look at one final example.
In this case we're setting the Phil character to an asterisk and then setting the field width of numb
to 10 we expect him to be displayed right justified in a field with of ten and asterisks to fill in
the remaining space.
And you can see by the output that that's exactly what we get.
Now we said to Phil character to a dash in the field with 10 for the first hello we expect hello to
display right justified in a field with of 10 and the blank space filled in with dashes.
Again that's exactly what we get.
And finally we set the field width of the last talo to 15.
We expect halo to display right justified in a field with 15 and since set Phil is persistent and the
last haloed does have a field with.
We expect that those blank spaces will be filled in with dashes and as you can see that's what we get.
So you see it's really not that complicated and the rules are very consistent using the formatting manipulators
that we've seen in the last few videos.
We can have a good amount of control over how our output looks.
Now let's head over to the idea and we'll see the stream formatters in life code.
Ok so I'm back I'm back in the IDM in the section 19 workspace and I'm in the manip underscore fields
project and what we'll do here is we'll play around with the field with the justification and the set.
Phil you'll notice on line 7 here that I've got a function called ruler and on that function does is
just display a line of numbers and that way we can line up our columns easier when we see them.
OK.
You don't have to do this but it just makes it easier to learn exactly what's going on.
And then I've got these three data items here that amusing.
Amusing number one which is an integer and it's one two three four.
I've got number two which is a double.
One two three four point five six seven eight.
And just a simple string hello first thing we'll do is just like we did in the slides it's just due
to defaults.
So all we're doing is we're putting number one number two and hello on to seek out and when we run that
you'll see everything just runs up together.
So let me build and run.
And then we see one two three four.
That's the integer.
And then one two three four point five seven rounded six significant figures here that's her precision
and then the halo everything jumbled up together at one right after the other.
That's exactly what we expect.
OK.
We can obviously comment this code out.
We can obviously display one on each line and sure that will help us read a little nicer because now
we'll see each one on each line.
But remember the defaults are being applied.
So we're getting one two three four is the integer.
One two three four point five seven which is round into the sixte precision for the digit.
And hello again.
Now let's play around with the field widths and here's a simple example.
What we're doing is again we're displaying the ruler and then we're setting the field with to 10 for
the next data item that's being put on the stream which happens to be numb in this case right here.
So numb will be displayed in a width of 10.
And if you recall number is that integer 1 2 3 4.
So that will be displayed in the width of 10 and the default is right justified.
But then when Number 2 in hollower displayed there is no field with associated with them that field
with only associates with the next item.
So these two should print right next to each other and right next to them one.
So let's take a look.
And there you go you can see one two three four right here.
And let me grab my pencil and I'll draw in white.
I think it'll be easier to see.
You can see right here the one two three four right there.
That's our integer and that's the tenth right.
The tenth column.
So it's being right justified in the tenth column.
But then after that we're seeing are both double and our string all printed run right next to the other
no formatting applied.
Now let's do one more example actually actually do a few more examples.
Let's do this one here.
And the source code is available to you I encourage you to go in there and play around and change things
around that's really the best way to learn it.
OK so now look what we're doing we're setting the width to 10 for number one and for number two.
So now we expect someone to be right justified in a with the 10.
Number two to be right justified and with a 10 and then hello with no formatting just put right on the
end of it.
Number two.
So let's run this and here down at the bottom you can see that that's exactly what happens here.
There's my field of 10 and there's one two three four right justified in there.
Here's the other with of 10 right here the next field and you see one two three four point five seven
right justified in there as well.
And there's my hello I'm going to put a couple of new lines at the end just so that you will separate
that time message a little bit.
So be a little bit easier to see what's going on.
And there they are at his hadn't commented out.
So uncomment them OK.
So let's take a look at this example now.
I will uncomment this code and notice what's happening here.
I'm starting to feel with 10 for each one of those items by default.
We're going to right justify everything.
So number one number two and Hella will each display right justified in a field of 10 and let's give
that a run.
And there you go you can see one two three for the integer in the field with 10.
One two three four point fifty seven in its own field with them 10.
And hello you can see the zero right there right.
That would be the 30th column the third field with of 10 and it's right justified.
Comment this out and see what this is doing.
Now this is doing exactly the same thing except we're left justifying each one of these.
Remember we have one left justified then we have to say it explicitly right justified is the default.
I always like to put in left and right that way.
Whoever's reading my code afterward understands exactly what's going on even though we know it's the
default.
Somebody might have forgotten so it's nice to see that there.
So here with the ten left justified number one with of 10 left justified number two and with the ten
left justified.
Hello.
So let's give them a run and you'll see the difference between this guy right here where they were right
justified and now down here were the left justified.
So you can see that one two three fourths displaying in column one.
One two three four point fifty seven in column 11 and hello in column 21.
Just like we expect.
OK so now let's do a couple with the set.
Fill in or comment this out.
We'll walk through this in a minute.
So notice what I'm doing here.
I'm setting the Phil character to the dash.
Now this is a persistent set in this persistence a light change.
And what I'm doing here is I'm setting the width to 10 left justified.
Number one.
Now number one was only four digits right.
So the rest of the space in net field of ten is going to be padded or filled with that Dasch character
and the same thing will happen to these guys.
Remember if we don't have a with set then the set feel doesn't apply.
It only applies when we set in the field with.
So in this case we expect to see all three of these guys left justified in a field with of 10 and all
the spaces that are left over other blank spaces in that field of 10 filled with dashes.
So let's take a look.
And you can see right down here you see one two three four and then dashes all the way to the tenth
position.
And then one two three four point five seven dashes all the way to the 20th position and then below
and dashes all the way to the 30th position.
OK had we justified them the dashes would have been on the left who would fill any empty space in that
field with.
And the last example is we're doing now is we're using different set fill characters.
So we're setting the go filled with 210 for each one of them again and we're left justifying.
And in this first example for numb I'm using asterisk as the fill character for number two.
I'm using the hash mark or the pound symbol and for Hello I'm using the dash.
We should see three different fill characters filling up all that space.
Remember once this statement is done this is the Phil character that sets and that's going to persist
until I change it otherwise.
All right so let's run this.
And there you can see that I'm using the asterisks for the first field.
The pound sides of the hash symbols for the second field and the dashes for the final field.
OK.
So that's it for this video in the next video.
We've got a challenge where we're going to put some of this stuff together to display a table.
Now you get a chance to play with them and put them together and understand how you can use your precision
your left your right your fixed and so forth all together to create a table of tour prices for trips
to South America.
So that's the challenge coming up the next video.